Usage: fastmash [OPTIONS] OPERATION FIELDS [OPERATION FIELDS ...]
       fastmash [TEXT OPTIONS] top:N FIELD | bottom:N FIELD
       fastmash [INPUT/OUTPUT OPTIONS] compare BEFORE AFTER [rank RESULT [absolute|percent] [limit N]] OPERATION FIELDS [...]
fastmash [INPUT OPTIONS] health [examples N] [type FIELD TYPE]
         [required FIELD] [nonmissing FIELD] [width N] [validate] [tsv]

Summarize fields from standard input. Results follow request order.
Linux x86-64 (including WSL2) and Apple Silicon macOS 15+.
Differences from GNU datamash 1.9:
https://fastmash.io/guide/differences.html

Top-N selection: top:N FIELD selects the highest N complete records;
bottom:N FIELD selects the lowest. N is a positive unsigned decimal integer
through 18446744073709551615; FIELD is one positional or escaped named field.
Named fields require --header-in or -H. Output is in
numeric rank order, with earlier input records winning ties. Infinities have
their numeric order, signed zeros tie, and unskipped NaNs are errors. --narm
omits records only for whole-field NA/N/A/NaN tokens, case-insensitively.
With -g, each adjacent group has its own cutoff; -s prepares sorted groups.
Rank order applies within groups, with original input ties preserved through spill.
Keys are not copied twice. Sorting retains complete records under its memory policy.
--header-out emits one copied-field header; -H consumes and emits a header.
All input is checked. Completed groups may emit before a later input failure.
At most N candidates are retained for the current group or whole dataset;
N limits record count, not bytes. Checked capacity failures refuse with 77.
--full is redundant, and -s without keys leaves selection unchanged.
Selection supports ordinary text and decoded CSV, with headers and adjacent or
sorted groups. Original input order breaks numeric ties, including after Spill.
--csv-in selects CSV input, --csv-out quotes each complete output field, and
--csv selects both; none implies headers. Copied data retains NUL/non-UTF-8 bytes.
All CSV fields are checked, including omitted or nonwinning records.
CSV input conflicts with text separators/comment filtering; any CSV conflicts
with -z, and CSV output conflicts with an explicit output delimiter.
Numeric presentation, result names, collapse delimiter,
filler, seed, --no-strict, --vnlog and --sort-cmd are unsupported for selection.

Dataset comparison: compare BEFORE AFTER applies the same numerical aggregates
to two raw datasets. Sources are literal paths; standalone '-' supplies stdin
on at most one side. Use -- before operands for paths beginning with '-'.
Both files open independently, including identical paths; before is read first.
Supports positional and named selectors and -g keys over ordinary text or CSV.
--header-in or -H requires an accepted input header on each source, even when
there is no data. Names bind independently, allowing reordered header fields;
positions keep their requested meaning. Comparison keys
consolidate globally, including interleaved occurrences, preserving each key's
original contribution order. Raw duplicates contribute normally; -s is redundant.
Keys compare as complete byte tuples, retaining field boundaries and bytes after
NUL. -i folds only ASCII A-Z; other bytes, whitespace and numeric spellings stay
distinct. Empty key text is valid; an absent key field is an error.
Without ranking, reports follow normalized tuple order, comparing unsigned bytes with shorter
prefixes first, independently of locale. Display the first before spelling,
or the first after spelling for added keys. Ordinary adjacent grouping is unchanged.
Columns: keys, presence, rank, rank_state, then before,
after, difference, difference_state, percentage, percentage_state per result.
Difference is signed after-minus-before. Percentage is difference / before * 100,
using the signed baseline and rounded binary80 at each step, without '%' suffix.
Both zero signs and nonfinite summaries have explicit unavailable states.
Empty sources are absent, with no zero filling; all-omitted values retain their
ordinary summary rules. Both inputs and every calculation finish before output.
--header-out or -H explicitly requests one fixed report header, including with
no data on either side. Labels use before header names when available, otherwise
ordinary field-N labels. --result-name indexes expanded summaries once and
replaces the label throughout that summary's six columns, leaving keys and
presence/rank/rank_state unchanged. No comparison header is implicit.
Before operations, rank RESULT [absolute|percent] ranks one expanded summary
result by descending change magnitude; the default measure is absolute.
RESULT is a 1-based result index after list/range expansion, independent of labels.
Optional limit N follows rank and keeps at most N ranked keys, without padding;
N accepts 1 through 18446744073709551615. Signs and overflow are errors;
leading zeros are accepted. Modifiers occur once, before all operations.
Matched zero changes remain eligible. Available infinite differences lead finite
absolute magnitudes; NaNs never rank. Ties use normalized complete key order.
Ranks are consecutive plain decimal numbers, independent of numeric formatting.
Every unrankable key follows the winners in key order, with an empty rank and
rank_state unavailable or one_sided. Its selected change state explains why.
A limit caps ranked keys only, so total report records can exceed N.
Without ranking, every key has empty rank and rank_state not_requested.
Finite change-arithmetic overflow refuses with 77; subnormals remain permitted.
--csv-in, --csv-out and --csv independently select strict decoded input and
individually encoded output, without implying headers. Both sources share one
input format. Complete decoded key bytes consolidate regardless of quote spelling.
All fields and records are checked, including unused, omitted and nonwinning data.
CSV errors retain original logical records, starting physical lines and detected
syntax locations. CSV-to-text keeps unescaped text framing and permits an output
delimiter; CSV output preserves complete fields and locale decimal commas.
Existing CSV separator/comment, -z, --vnlog and output-delimiter conflicts apply.
Input/calculation failures precede every output byte, including headers; output
write or close errors can leave partial bytes and prevent successful status.
Text-result aggregates, Full rows, other modes, --vnlog, --no-strict, explicit
filler/collapse delimiter/seed and --sort-cmd are unsupported for comparison.

Operations:
  count     Count values in the selected field, including text and empty fields
  countunique  Count distinct text values (case-sensitive unless -i)
  unique, uniq  Sorted distinct text values (case-sensitive unless -i)
  collapse  All accepted text values in input order, including duplicates
  first     First accepted value in the selected field
  last      Last accepted value in the selected field
  rand      Random accepted value in the selected field
  min       Minimum numeric value in the selected field
  max       Maximum numeric value in the selected field
  absmin    Value with the smallest magnitude, preserving its original sign
  absmax    Value with the largest magnitude, preserving its original sign
  range     Maximum minus minimum numeric value in the selected field
  sum       Sum the selected field
  mean      Arithmetic mean of the selected field
  wmean     Weighted mean of a VALUE:WEIGHT field pair
  geomean   Geometric mean of the selected field
  harmmean  Harmonic mean of the selected field
  ms        Mean of squared values
  rms       Square root of the mean of squared values
  median    Middle sorted value, or the average of the two middle values
  mode      Numeric value in the longest sorted run (first run wins ties)
  antimode  Numeric value in the shortest sorted run (first run wins ties)
  q1        First quartile using type-7 interpolation
  q3        Third quartile using type-7 interpolation
  iqr       Third quartile minus first quartile
  perc[:N]  Percentile using type-7 interpolation (default 95; integers 1..100)
  trimmean[:P]  Mean after trimming floor(P*N) values from each sorted end
                (default 0; 0 <= P <= 0.5; 0.5 gives the median)
  pvar      Population variance, using two passes in input order
  svar      Sample variance (nan for a single accepted value)
  pstdev    Population standard deviation
  sstdev    Sample standard deviation (nan for a single accepted value)
  madraw    Median absolute deviation, without a scaling factor
  mad       Median absolute deviation scaled by 1.4826
  pskew     Population skewness (nan for a single accepted value)
  sskew     Sample skewness (nan for fewer than three accepted values)
  pkurt     Population excess kurtosis (nan for a single accepted value)
  skurt     Sample excess kurtosis (nan for fewer than four accepted values)
  jarque    Jarque-Bera normality p-value using GNU's formula
  dpo       D'Agostino-Pearson normality p-value using GNU's formula
  pcov      Population covariance of a LEFT:RIGHT field pair
  scov      Sample covariance of a LEFT:RIGHT field pair
  ppearson  Population Pearson correlation of a LEFT:RIGHT field pair
  spearson  Sample Pearson correlation of a LEFT:RIGHT field pair
  dotprod   Dot product of a LEFT:RIGHT field pair

Percentile 100 selects the final ordered sample. Non-integer percentile parameters are unsupported.

Fields are positive numbers, comma-separated lists or ascending numeric ranges.
Paired operations require colon-separated LEFT:RIGHT selectors; pair lists are
comma-separated and ranges cannot be combined with pairs.
Grouping also accepts groupby, grouping or gb before its key fields and operations.
Keys precede results. Use -s to sort stably before grouping nonadjacent equal keys.
Grouping requires at least one operation. Key ranges
allow equal endpoints and are limited to 1..2147483646; scalar keys use the
existing signed integer domain. Keys are case-sensitive unless -i. GNU compares
equal-length keys up to NUL; displayed keys preserve their complete byte spans.
With input headers, lists may also use exact, case-sensitive column names.
The first duplicate name wins. Backslash escapes one byte in a field name.
Operation names are case-insensitive; repeated fields produce repeated results.

Options:
  -g, --group=FIELDS     Summarize adjacent groups with these ordered keys
  -s, --sort             Sort stably by grouping keys before calculation
  -i, --ignore-case      Ignore ASCII case in grouping, sorting and text summaries
  --header-in            Use the first input record as column names
  --header-out           Label results, using input names with --header-in
  --result-name=INDEX:NAME Replace one result label; repeat for selected results
  --csv-out              Encode calculation/comparison output as quoted CSV
  --csv-in               Read strict quoted CSV for calculations/comparison
  --csv                  Same as --csv-in --csv-out
  -H, --headers          Same as --header-in --header-out
  -f, --full             Prefix results with all fields of a representative row
  --no-strict            Accepted; has no effect on aggregation
  -F TEXT, --filler=TEXT  Accepted; has no effect on aggregation
  -z, --zero-terminated End input and output records with NUL instead of LF
  -W, --whitespace       Split on runs of spaces/tabs; default output is tab
  -C, --skip-comments    Skip lines starting with # or ; after spaces/tabs
  --narm                 Skip NA, N/A and NaN values, ignoring case
  --vnlog                Read annotated whitespace records with named columns
  --format=FORMAT        One e/f/g/a conversion, flags, width and precision
  -R, --round=N          Display N fractional places (1..50); no calculation change
  -S VALUE, --seed VALUE Seed rand reproducibly; the last value wins
  -t BYTE, --field-separator=BYTE
                         Use one literal byte between input fields
  --output-delimiter=BYTE Use one literal byte between results
  -c BYTE, --collapse-delimiter=BYTE
                         Use one literal byte between text-list values
  -h, --help             Show this help without reading input
  -V, --version          Show the package version without reading input
  --color=auto|always|never Style eligible help, diagnostics and readable health
  --no-color             Same as --color=never; the last color control wins
  --                     End option processing

By default, fields and results are tab-separated; records end with LF. With -z, LF is data.
The final input record may omit its terminator. CR bytes are retained.
For text output, the input separator also sets the output separator unless explicitly overridden.
Unique and collapse list values are comma-separated unless -c specifies another byte.
With --csv-out, results use commas and LF endings; commas, quotes, CR and LF
inside a field are quoted, quotes are doubled, and empty fields print as "".
CSV output does not imply headers. It permits text-input -t, -W and -C and the
collapse delimiter, but conflicts with --output-delimiter, -z and --vnlog.
With --csv-in, commas separate decoded byte fields; LF or CRLF ends records.
Quotes open only at a field's start, doubled quotes decode to one quote, and
quoted fields may contain commas, CR and LF. Spaces and BOM bytes remain data.
Malformed quoting in any field and bare CR outside quotes are errors.
A blank CSV record has one empty field; a trailing comma adds an empty field.
Empty input has no records; a complete final record may omit its ending.
CSV input supports aggregate and per-row operations and --full. Aggregate groups
sort decoded keys with -s, spilling lossless temporary runs when needed under
the maintained sort-memory policy. Statistical samples remain in memory.
Per-row operations retain their ordinary conflict with grouping keys.
-s without grouping keys keeps input order and does not retain input for sorting.
CSV input conflicts with explicit -t, -W and -C; either direction conflicts with
-z and --vnlog. --csv-in keeps text output and its normal tab default; an
explicit output delimiter is permitted. --csv enables both directions.
CSV switches are exact-only, idempotent, and do not imply headers.
CSV is unavailable for crosstab, table and field modes; health remains text-only.
All three long delimiter options also accept a separate argument.
Text whitespace mode skips leading spaces/tabs and
collapses runs, but trailing spaces/tabs create one empty final field.
The last -W or -t controls input splitting; an explicit output delimiter wins.
With --full, fields are reconstructed using the text output delimiter or encoded
individually for CSV output. The row is
initially the first input row; first/last/rand and extrema selection can replace
it. With several operations, it need not supply every result. Headers prefix all
input column names (or generated names), rather than GroupBy labels. GNU's
aggregate --full deprecation warning is retained for compatibility.
Result names require explicit --header-out or -H. INDEX counts result columns
from 1, after list/range expansion, excluding grouping keys and --full copies.
A paired operation has one result; cut counts each selected field. Untargeted
labels stay generated. Repeated names are permitted; repeated targets are errors.
Names may include colons but cannot be empty. Text output rejects names containing
its output delimiter or record terminator; CSV output quotes commas, quotes and
line breaks in names. --result-name also accepts a separate INDEX:NAME argument
and requires its exact spelling. It is supported for aggregate and per-row
operations, not crosstab, table or field modes.
Aggregation accepts ragged rows if all selected fields exist. --no-strict and
--filler do not supply absent aggregate fields. Transpose and reverse accept
ragged rows with --no-strict; transpose uses --filler for missing cells.
Crosstab/ct KEY1,KEY2 [OP FIELD] creates a pivot table, defaulting to count.
Exactly one expanded calculation is allowed. Output labels are ordered bytewise;
--filler supplies missing combinations. Use -s to combine nonadjacent groups:
without it, repeated cells retain the first completed group's result.
Completed cells stay in memory, without a fixed matrix cap or table spilling.
Unlike GNU 1.9, labels are not truncated to 511 bytes. Embedded-NUL grouping
and label behavior remain GNU-compatible; arbitrary binary keys are not lossless.
With -C, skipped comments do not count toward error line numbers or input headers.
Blank lines and inline comment markers remain data.
With --vnlog, the first single-# line supplies column names; blank, ## and #!
prologue lines are skipped. Data ignores blank/# lines and everything after #,
even inside a field. Semicolons remain data. Trailing spaces/tabs are ignored.
Output uses spaces and a '# ' header. Numeric-looking selectors are column names.
Use --narm separately to remove NA/N/A/NaN; '-' remains a literal value.
Vnlog requires LF records, whitespace input, default space output and filler '-';
conflicting options are rejected. --filler still does not supply missing fields.
Wmean accepts finite nonnegative contribution weights; fractions are valid and
weights need not sum to one. Zero weights contribute nothing after pair validation.
With --narm, wmean validates nonmissing value then weight before omitting the
whole pair if either is NA/N/A/NaN. Omission is local to each weighted request.
Every nonempty calculation needs positive retained weight (error 1 otherwise).
Weighted finite product/total overflow, a nonzero product rounded to zero, or
final division overflow refuses with 77. Subnormals and final underflow are allowed.
The binary80 trace rounds weight*value, adds its product, adds the weight, then
divides at completion in encounter order. It retains two totals per request;
scaling weights can change rounding. Wmean does not replace the --full row.
Text and decoded CSV reports preserve per-group encounter order through sorting
and spill. --csv-in selects decoded fields; --csv-out encodes results, keys,
copied fields and labels independently. --csv selects both directions.
CSV syntax is checked even in unused fields and omitted or zero-weight records.
With --narm, other selected fields skip missing values independently. Matching is
exact: spaces are not trimmed. Absent columns still fail; empty fields fail for
numeric operations.
Covariance, Pearson and dotprod sides compact independently, so equal retained lengths can pair values from
different records. An empty right side yields nan before the length comparison.
Dotprod multiplies compacted pairs and adds the products in input order.
If all values are missing, count/sum are 0 and mean/geomean are nan.
Harmmean divides the accepted count by the sum of reciprocals, accumulated in
input order. All-missing harmmean is nan.
Ms sums squared values in input order, then divides by the accepted count.
Rms takes the square root of ms. All-missing ms/rms are nan.
Median/q1/q3/iqr share samples and sorting for each selected field per group.
Pvar/svar/pstdev/sstdev share original-order samples and squared deviations per
field, separately from quantiles. Their storage grows with the largest group.
Storage grows with input; allocation refusal is reported instead of a sample cap.
Covariance, Pearson and dotprod retain two growable sample arrays per request; they do not spill.
Spearson is sample Pearson correlation, not Spearman rank correlation.
Moments and normality operations share input-order samples per selected field.
Jarque/dpo preserve GNU's tail cancellation (tiny p-values can become zero) and
its formulas; the historical sample and exponential-domain caps are removed.
Median preserves GNU's numeric ordering, including NaN and signed-zero
ties. Even medians add the middle pair before halving; overflow is preserved.
All-missing median is nan. Empty input produces no result row.
Q1/q3/iqr use the same ordering. Quartiles interpolate as
lower + fraction * (upper - lower), even when fraction is zero. A single value
is its own quartile; iqr still subtracts q1 from q3. All-missing results are nan.
Min/max return -inf/inf when all values are missing. Equal values retain the
first value, including signed zero. An initial NaN remains the result;
later NaNs do not replace a value. With --narm, exact NaN tokens are skipped.
Absmin/absmax use the same rules, comparing magnitudes and retaining the first
value on ties. All-missing absmin/absmax results are -inf/inf.
Range retains min/max endpoints with the same strict comparisons, then subtracts
minimum from maximum. All-missing range is nan; equal infinities also yield nan.
First/last return N/A when all values are missing. They accept empty fields
and raw text; an embedded NUL ends the displayed text, as in GNU datamash.
Rand uses the same text and missing-value rules, consuming one shared draw per
accepted rand field in request order. Explicit seeds give reproducible draws.
The long --seed form requires its argument.
Count accepts text without numeric conversion. It counts existing empty fields;
a blank text record has no fields and still reports a missing-column error.
A blank CSV record has one empty field, which count accepts.

Examples:
  printf 'A\t1\nA\t2\nB\t4\n' | LC_ALL=C fastmash -g 1 sum 2
  printf '1\t2\n3\t4\n' | LC_ALL=C fastmash sum 1 mean 2
  printf '1,2\n3,4\n' | LC_ALL=C fastmash -t, sum 1-2
  printf 'price\tunits\n3\t2\n' | LC_ALL=C fastmash --header-in --header-out sum 2 mean 1
  printf 'Revenue\tCost\n2\t10\n3\t20\n' | LC_ALL=C fastmash -H sum Revenue mean Cost
  printf 'a\tb\n1\t2\n3\t4\n' | LC_ALL=C fastmash -H sum 2,1-2 count a
  printf 'a\tb\n1\t2\n3\t4\n' | LC_ALL=C fastmash -H pcov a:b
  printf 'reading\n2\n4\n' | LC_ALL=C fastmash -H --result-name=1:total sum reading mean reading
  printf '1\t2\n3\t4\n' | LC_ALL=C fastmash --header-out --result-name=2:total sum 2,1

Runtime and numerical limits:
  countunique/unique/collapse retain text per operation/group until final output.
  Storage grows as needed; duplicates consume storage and allocation may fail.
  Linux x86-64 with glibc, or Apple Silicon macOS 15+; default %.14g formatting.
  The Linux system sort route (below) needs /proc; without it, those jobs sort
  in process. macOS always uses built-in sorting and needs no sort supervisor.
  Installation and requirements: https://fastmash.io/install.html
  Locales: C/POSIX, C.UTF-8 and the glibc locales, @modifier ones included (as
  glibc, a modifier it has no locale for is dropped). Each category uses
  nonempty LC_ALL, its LC_* value, LANG, then C. Any LC_MESSAGES is accepted,
  and any LC_CTYPE except with -i (see below). A name glibc has no locale for
  behaves as C, as in GNU. Character sets other than UTF-8 keep a locale's
  numbers where its separators are ASCII; sorting in them is refused.
  Numbers follow the glibc 2.43 rules
  of each locale whose decimal separator is one byte (all but ps_AF): its
  decimal separator, and its thousands separator and grouping for the apostrophe
  format flag. Input thousands separators are invalid.
  Locale behavior is built into Rust; host locale installation is unnecessary.
  The last --format or --round wins.
  Formats allow literals and %% plus one e/f/g/a (or uppercase) directive;
  GNU's 99-byte format-text limit applies. Output grows with checked allocation.
  Record, command and operation storage grows as needed; allocation can fail.
  GNU identifiers allow 511 decoded bytes.
  Sorting combinations of count, first, last, unique, countunique, collapse, sum,
  mean, wmean, min, max, absmin, absmax, range, median, q1, q3, iqr, perc, trimmean,
  mode, antimode, madraw, mad, pvar, svar, pstdev and sstdev uses native Rust sorting.
  Numerical results follow GNU datamash 1.9 on x86-64 glibc, not every GNU build.
  NaN payload input is accepted. Invalid arithmetic generates positive canonical
  NaN; signs and last digits can differ from GNU (see the differences page).
  Unsupported cases and checked allocation refusals exit with status 77.
  Native sorting keeps only the fields jobs use (whole records with --full, in
  language locales, or for numbers when the separator is a letter, digit or the
  decimal point). It holds the whole input in memory when memory
  allows; otherwise it sorts 64 MiB chunks and spills them to anonymous
  files in TMPDIR (default /tmp). FASTMASH_SORT_MEMORY_BYTES fixes the chunk
  target; FASTMASH_SORT_TRACE reports the choice on standard error.
  With standard input from a file whose keys repeat, or from a pipe in a
  language locale, -s groups instead of sorting: each group's records are
  collected as they arrive, and only the groups are sorted (hash grouping).
  Where that cannot give the sorted result exactly, the input is read again
  (piped input is held in memory for that) and sorted. FASTMASH_GROUPING=sort
  always sorts; FASTMASH_PIPE_GROUPING=sort sorts piped input, and =hash
  holds it in every locale.
  On Linux in C/C.UTF-8, other sorted operations use /usr/bin/sort (stable, NUL-capable)
  through fastmash-sort-supervisor beside fastmash, where both can run safely:
  HUP/INT/TERM neither ignored (as by nohup) nor blocked, waitable children,
  pidfds and close_range(CLOEXEC) (Linux 5.11+), both executable, sort not
  BusyBox or Toybox, a -t byte below 0x80 and a writable, searchable TMPDIR.
  Otherwise they sort in process. Linux spill uses O_TMPFILE, or unlinked
  private files where TMPDIR lacks it (NFS, older overlayfs). macOS uses
  private unlinked files; external sorting on Linux
  creates a private directory in TMPDIR when it starts.
  C/C.UTF-8 sorting uses byte order. Language sorting uses pinned Rust ICU rules
  for letters and digits and glibc 2.43's table for punctuation, symbols and
  spaces, in the locales whose order was verified against glibc 2.43 (some
  keys with punctuation next to digits, and vulgar fractions, differ); all
  families use the native spill engine. Keys must be valid, NUL-free UTF-8 there. Language sorting covers the
  glibc locales of aa af agr ak am anp ayc az bem ber bg bhb bi bs byn ce chr crh
  cy de dv en eo es eu ff fil fr fy ga gbm gd gez gl gv ha he hif hne hr hsb ht hy
  ia id ig is it ks kv kw lb lg li lij ln lv mag mfe mg mhr miq mjw mk mn mnw ms
  mt nds nhn niu nl nr nso om os pa pap pl pt quz rif ro ru rw sat scn sd sgs sid
  sm so sq sr ss ssy st su sw ta tcy the ti tig tk tn to tok tpi ts unm ur uz ve
  wa wae wal wo xh yo yuw zgh zu, except az_IR, ber_DZ, crh_UA, en_CA, fr_CA,
  pa_IN, sd_IN and sr_RS.
  Native sorting reports a missing input header for unresolved named grouping
  or rmdup keys (status 1); read errors take precedence. A command containing
  wmean still succeeds without output when its input header ends at clean EOF.
  With no keys, -s is a no-op. Locale differences are on the differences page.
  -i preserves original output spelling and stable sort ties. It does not fold
  column names or rmdup keys; with rmdup, it only changes requested sort order.
  Case/group identity stays byte-based with ASCII folding. -i is refused under
  the az_AZ, crh_UA, ku_TR, tr_CY, tr_TR and tt_RU@iqtelif character types,
  where glibc does not fold i and I.
  Diagnostics remain English; UTF-8 character categories use curly quotations.
  Other numeric locales are refused only when numbers are read or printed
  (count, countunique and strbin results only with --format or --round);
  other collations only when sorting.
  --sort-cmd and the explicit line selector are not supported.
  Invoke linewise operations directly, for example: fastmash base64 1.
  GNU-private ---print-inf, ---print-nan, ---print-progname and ---rmdup-test
  hooks are omitted. Migration guidance: https://fastmash.io/guide/migrating.html
  GNU option abbreviations and short clusters are supported. POSIXLY_CORRECT
  stops option scanning at the first operand; otherwise options may follow it.

Mode/antimode share sorted samples with quantiles. MAD/raw MAD share a separate
buffer transformed in place into absolute deviations. Both families grow in
memory and report allocation failure; sample storage does not spill to disk.

cut/echo FIELD is a per-row operation that prints the selected fields.
Field modes: reverse reverses the fields of each record (use --no-strict for
changing widths); nop/noop consumes input, and with --full emits its records.
cut and these modes use growable record storage.

Per-row numeric operations: getnum[:TYPE] FIELD extracts a numeric prefix from
the first matching character run. Types: n (digits), i (signed integer), h (hex),
o (octal), p (digits/dot, default), d (signed digits/dot). No match, conversion
failure or known range error produces zero. Integer conversion uses signed 64-bit
range. Numeric type parameters are errors; use a character type from this list.
round, floor, ceil, trunc and frac FIELD transform each selected number per row.
round uses nearest integer with ties away from zero; frac keeps the signed
fraction. Actual zero becomes positive zero. Unlike GNU 1.9, negative NaN remains
NaN for these five operations. --round controls display only. These operations
use growable record storage and can be combined with cut, not group calculations.

Binning: bin[:WIDTH] FIELD returns the lower numeric bucket boundary (default
width 100). strbin[:COUNT] FIELD assigns raw field bytes reproducibly to buckets
0..COUNT-1 (default 10), including NUL bytes. COUNT must be a nonzero integer.
These are per-row operations with the same selectors and output options as cut.
Bin preserves signed NaN input. Zero width retains GNU's
other results: zero input gives zero; nonzero finite/infinite input gives -nan.

Table modes: check [N lines] [N fields] validates widths and optional counts.
transpose exchanges rows and columns. Widths must match unless --no-strict is
used; missing cells then use --filler (default N/A). Headers are ordinary rows.
Transpose retains present fields and compact indexes in memory, without fixed
row/column limits or disk spill; allocation failure is reported before output.
rmdup/dedup FIELD retains the first row for each single key. Unique keys grow
in memory and do not spill; -s uses external sorting in C/C.UTF-8 where it can
run (see above) and native sorting otherwise, as in the language locales.
Multiple keys are not supported (status 77).

Table health: health inspects every accepted data record and reports inconsistent
widths, blank or duplicated header labels, and absent, empty or candidate-missing
fields. Missing indicators are exact NA, N/A or NaN tokens in any letter case,
without trimming; they may be valid codes. Six cell counts partition each field:
absent, empty, candidate missing, integer, other number and text. Classification
uses whole-field numeric syntax in the effective locale, without arithmetic.
Integers allow leading numeric whitespace, an optional sign and decimal digits;
fractional, exponent, hexadecimal and recognized nonfinite encodings are other
numbers. Trailing bytes make a value text.
Cell counts exclude the Input header and include absences before a field appears.
Absent, empty and candidate-missing values do not participate in type inference.
Numeric majorities infer integer if all numeric encodings are integers, otherwise
number; text majorities infer text. Ties and no eligible values are undetermined.
mixed_types observes numeric/text coexistence; inferred integer/number expectations
report incompatible text as type_mismatch. Inferred text does not reject numbers.
type FIELD integer|number|text supplies a type expectation and replaces inference
for that field. Type checks exempt absent, empty and candidate-missing values.
required FIELD rejects absent and empty values; nonmissing FIELD also rejects
candidate missing tokens. If both are supplied, nonmissing is the one presence
rule. Literal NA can pass required/text checks. width N declares the field count,
including zero, checking both the Input header and data records. Without it, an
Input header defines the width; otherwise the most frequent full-input width does,
with ties choosing the smaller width. Width does not declare fields on its own.
FIELD is one existing selector, without lists, ranges or pairs. Ordinary input
accepts positive decimal positions or escaped exact header names, including numeric
names. Vnlog numeric selectors remain names. Named rules require a unique full-byte
Input-header match; ordinary positions work even with duplicated headers. Positions
never observed are tracked sparsely, including their absent cells.
Controls can occur in any order. Identical repeats are harmless; conflicting types,
widths or example limits are errors. A complete ordinary report succeeds with any
findings. validate requires at least one supplied type, presence or width rule;
it emits the same report, returning 1 only for declared violations and 0 otherwise.
Observations and inferred suspicions remain advisory. Empty and header-only input
do not invent data violations; a declared width still checks an existing header.
examples N keeps the earliest N examples per finding (default 3, zero hides them),
each limited to 128 raw bytes. Mixed types reserve the earliest numeric and text
witnesses when N >= 2, fill remaining slots with earliest unused values and print
them in input order. Omissions count eligible cells separately from that finding's
one-field count. Reports disclose omitted and truncated examples.
Locations count accepted records from 1, including the Input header; filtered
comments and annotations are excluded. Counts measure records, header fields or
cells or fields and may overlap. -t, -W, -z, -C, --header-in, -H/--headers and --vnlog
select input handling; -H/--headers contributes its input meaning to the report.
Calculation-only options, including --header-out and result delimiters, are errors.
The report names the effective numeric decimal separator. Field counters, width
summaries, header bytes and bounded examples grow in memory; checked capacity
failures refuse the command before report output. Read failures prevent a report;
write failures fail.
tsv selects the schema-version-1 report for scripts; readable output is the default.
Its mandatory header has 13 columns: row_kind, category, basis, field_index,
field_name, count, count_unit, record_index, expected, observed, sample,
sample_truncated and examples_omitted. TAB and LF delimit the report even with -z.
Rows contain fixed ordered summaries, ascending fields and positive findings,
each immediately followed by its retained examples. count_unit distinguishes
data_records, header_records, header_fields, cells and fields; finding counts
must not be added into a total of bad records. Inapplicable cells are empty.
Both renderers escape backslash, TAB, LF, CR and NUL as \\, \t, \n, \r and \0;
other non-printable/non-ASCII bytes use uppercase \xHH. Labels remain complete;
only samples are bounded to 128 raw bytes. Repeating tsv is harmless, and it
preserves validation status and observations. The schema's complete row mapping is
at https://fastmash.io/guide/table-health.html.

base64 FIELD encodes complete raw field bytes using padded standard base64.
debase64 FIELD strictly decodes it; whitespace, bad padding and noncanonical
trailing bits are errors. Decoded text output stops at the first NUL, as in GNU.
Both operations are linewise and accept no parameters.

md5, sha1, sha224, sha256, sha384 and sha512 FIELD produce lowercase hexadecimal
checksums of complete raw field bytes. These linewise operations accept no
parameters. MD5 and SHA-1 are compatibility checksums, not collision-resistant
security mechanisms.

dirname, basename, extname and barename FIELD transform byte fields as GNU paths,
without filesystem access or host-native normalization. Only / separates names;
input after NUL is ignored. Extensions follow GNU's ASCII and compound-suffix
rules (.gz/.xz/.lz/.gpg/.bz2/.std), not general file-type detection. These are
linewise operations with no parameters.
